(upbeat music)
Let's talk about numbers in JavaScript.
There's only one type of number in JavaScript,
and that is simply just number,
and it's funny that I say the word type of
because there's actually a little keyword
in JavaScript that will allow you
to check what the type of an actual value is.
So let's go ahead and like say const age.
By the way, I've commented out everything up here
just to give us a fresh JS file.
So I'll say const age = 100
and const name = Wes.
If I were to go in here and say typeof age
that gives us number and typeof name, gives us string.
So the typeof and then a space followed by an actual value,
and that value could be a variable
or it could just be simply typeof
actual value that we type in there.
That will tell you whether it's a number,
a string, any of the different types
that we are looking at right now.
So that's pretty handy especially
when you're working with data that's coming from the user.
You're not necessarily sure what type is actually coming in.
You maybe you need to a little bit of massaging.
So numbers in JavaScript are pretty simple.
You can create what's called a integer,
which is a whole number,
or you can create a what's called a float,
which is a number that has a decimal,
and they are both used in the same type of number.
There are multiplication, division, addition
and subtraction available to us.
So if we just say const a = 10
and const b = 20,
if we do a + b,
we get 30.
So
a * b,
200, a / b
and then a - b.
You get the actual values that you would expect.
If there's a decimal, it will return the decimal.
Otherwise, it would just return a whole number.
Pretty simple, the only sort of one to aware of here
is when you are mixing types.
So we looked at this earlier.
If you have a number one,
and you try to do math with something that is not a number,
which is a type of string,
then you start getting
into what's called concatenation world, right?
And that's what in JavaScript
we refer to as the plus sign is loaded
meaning the plus sign can be used with numbers to add.
It can be used with strings to concatenate,
and then there's this whole world of hurt
in the middle that you can run into lots of bugs
where, if you accidentally do use a plus sign
with one of each, then the results
are a little bit unpredictable.
If you try to do math with strings,
it will actually convert them for you.
So 10 times the string of 10,
it will say like,"Um, what are you doing?
"Doing math with strings,
"that's not allowed."
But it'll say like, "Okay, you're multiplying,
"the only thing you can do with a multiplication is numbers,
"so let me just convert 'em over to actual numbers first."
That works with division and subtraction,
but not the plus sign because the plus sign
also does concatenation.
So bit of a headache there.
So we need to make sure that we are,
whenever we're doing math, we're actually dealing
with true numbers and not sort of mixing the two.
Along with numbers, we actually have
what are called helper methods.
Now, we haven't gone into functions or methods just yet,
but I'm sure you can understand what these are.
So if we type in capital M Math.,
we actually have a whole bunch of what are called
helper methods in here that are used for doing math.
And there's tons in here if you wanna
get really nerdy about it,
but sort of the four that you will probably use
is you can run Math.round,
and then, when you put a value
in between these parentheses here,
that's called passing a value.
We're gonna go much into that
when we hit functions in just a minute
and, if you give it a actual value,
it's obviously gonna round it up or down
depending on what we have.
Similarly, we have Math.floor.
That will give you the lower end of that number,
and we have Math.seal.
I'm joking, it's ceil, C-E-I-L,
and that will you the upper one
and then we have Math.random,
which will give you a random number
between zero and one,
which is helpful for doing random stuff.
We'll show you how,
like how could you get a random number between one and 10,
and how could you get a random number between 10 and 50.
We'll look at lots of examples
as to how to do that when we get into some exercises.
Along with multiplication, division, subtraction
and addition, we actually have two other operators,
and those are the modulo and the power.
So if we take
a look here,
I've got these Smarties open right here.
This is a Canadian candy that we have,
and it's kinda like M&M's except a little bit worse
and what happens is you buy a box of 'em
and you wanna split 'em up between your kids.
So let's say, get outta here,
let's say there's 20 Smarties in a box,
and you've got three kids.
Let's do a little bit of math here.
Make it fun.
So const smarties = 20 smarties,
and const kids = 3
so how many smarties does each kid get.
Const eachKidGets
smarties / kids.
We'll go console log
Each kid gets,
eachKidGets.
So each kid gets 6.6666666667 Smarties.
Well, obviously that's not gonna work.
You're not gonna split a Smartie into 66666666,
so what we can do there is you say like okay,
obviously it's the whole number of Smarties.
We're not gonna, we can't round up
because you can't just like pull a fraction
of a Smartie from thin air,
so you have to go to the bottom,
and that's what Math.floor is,
so Math.floor,
and now each kid gets six.
Now, the question is how many are left over,
how many did dad get?
Like when you can no longer evenly distribute them,
each kid gets six, six, six, there's obviously
gonna be two left, but what you can do is
you can use the modulo operator
to tell how many are left
after they've been evenly split up.
So if I take the Smarties,
and I use the % sign, that's the modulo operator,
and I divide it by kids, it gives me two.
Why, because after the number of kids
has been evenly divided into Smarties
how many are left that cannot be evenly divided in?
Of course, that is two are left.
So we could make another const dadGets
smarties
mod
kids,
and that will tell you exactly how many are left
at the end of a day.
Again, let's do another simple example.
I've got 10 and I've got 10 Smarties,
and I got three kids,
so it's gonna be one left at the end of the day.
So we'll look at some examples of where
that might be helpful.
So that modulo operator I don't use all that often,
but it does come in handy
when you sort of need to know it
rather than having to do the math of subtraction
and rounding and all of that sort of hard stuff.
Other things you need to know about math in JavaScript
is that if you do something like this
0.1 + 0.2
is equal to
0.3330000004
and usually when people are learning
they go, "Uh, I'm gonna tweet this.
"How garbage is JavaScript."
so what I invite you to do
is to type in window.location = ``
we'll say https://
and then we'll use our $ curly brackets
0.1 + 0.2 .com.
Ready?
Boom and this will bring you to 0.3000000
repeat 4.com
and then it will,
it says, "Your language isn't broken.
"You're doing floating point math.
"Computers can only natively store integers,
"integers are whole numbers,
"so they need some sort of way
"of representing decimal numbers.
"Representation comes at some sort of degree of inaccuracy.
"That's why more often than not."
And it goes onto show that almost every language
that you work in,
not ColdFusion apparently, will actually
return this result to you.
So that's how floating point numbers work,
and that's why it's probably one thing
that you'll need to know
is if you ever are working with money
don't store money in dollars and cents.
So if I have something like const price
and I say it's like $10 and 34 cents,
and you somebody gives you a $20 bill
that can run into little situations here or there
where you do get the sort of long rounded number
and you have like a half a cent
and what do you do with that.
And if you try to refund something
like I had an own bug on my own course platform
where if someone paid a certain amount,
and I tried to refund them,
it was trying to refund them with this like decimal in it.
So what I do now is that I always store all
of my prices in just cents.
So that way you're always working with whole numbers.
You never have to deal with fractions
or partial numbers and then when you wanna go
and show that actual value to somebody
you simply divide it by zero
and then round the cents.
We'll look at a bunch of examples
of displaying money pretty soon actually.
We'll get into those.
Some other things we need to know about is
that JavaScript also has infinity and negative infinity.
So there actually is like at the end of the day
there is a max that computers can calculate with numbers,
and if you try to calculate something that is too high
then it will return to you infinity or negative infinity.
So let me show you here.
If I have 10, and if you use ** that's actually
to the power of, so 10 to the power of two is 100,
but you start jacking that up real quick,
you start to hit, you see like this is to the power of 60,
but as soon as you go higher than the computer
can actually calculate, it will return to you Infinity.
And if you do typeof Infinity it will give you number.
So infinity and negative infinity
are both true numbers in JavaScript.
Again, I probably have never used that.
The only time I've ever run into it
is where I've accidentally done some math
where I goofed it up, and then it will tell you,
you've hit infinity.
This is higher than computers
can possibly calculate right now.
The other thing that we need to know
is that there is another number that is not a number,
and it's NaN,
so if you try to do something like 10 / dog,
it gives you NaN,
and that means Not a Number,
and Not a Number is a actually a number.
So typeof NaN is a number, which is confusing enough,
but that's something that you're going to see
where if you are trying to do math
with something that is not a number,
instead of erroring out, it's just going
to extra return to you Not a Number.
That's it for numbers.
Let's move into the next one, which is Boolean.